h1. MediaWiki to Redmine Migration Tool (MRMT)


This script parses *MediaWiki XML exports* and pushes them into *Redmine Wiki pages*.

The basic logic for this is:

# Parse XML file using **Nokogiri**
# Tweak the MediaWiki markup (mainly search & replace)
# Convert MediaWiki markup to Textile using **Pandoc** binary (via **PandocRuby**)
# Tweak the Textile markup (mainly search & replace)
# Push all pages including their revisions _impersonating the original author_ using **ActiveResource**



h2. Thanks

Initial implementation is sponsored by "vita-life Magnetic-Resonance-Systems(vita-life - Creating Vitality; official site)":http://www.vita-life.com and **Planio, the Redmine-based Project Management Platform** ("Affiliate-Link(Planio - The Project Management Platform; official site)":https://plan.io/?ref=r62Ibn).

This script was thoroughly tested and confirmed to work for migrations from **MediaWiki** to **Planio Redmine** wikis.

I'd also like to thank the **Planio Support Team** and Stack Overflow user **mechanicalfish** for certain hints during development.



h2. Important Notes

* The script assumes that all *revisions in the XML files are already in correct order*. Experience shows that this typically is the case when exporting from MediaWiki.
* Due to restrictions in the Redmine API, this script adds the _original revision timestamp_ *to the revision comment*. The revision itself will be associated with the current date (= date the migration is run).
* MediaWiki contributor names will be converted to *lowercase Redmine user names*.
* *Table of contents* (@{{>toc}}@) will be inserted at the top of every page.
* If you want to import into different projects, *export one XML file per project* (see @--pagelist@ option of MediaWiki's __dumpBackup.php__).
* This script is known to work with XML exports from *MediaWiki version 1.18.1*.
* The script will *fail intentionally if pages to be pushed already exist* in the Redmine wiki.
** *Hint:* The following **curl** command poses a *quick way to delete pages*: @curl -i -X DELETE --user "$ADMIN_API_KEY_HERE:$PASSWORD_IS_IRRELEVANT" https://example.plan.io/projects/$PROJECTNAME/wiki/$DESIRED_PAGENAME.xml@
* You may also use **curl** to get *more meaningful responses*. Example:
** @curl -i -H 'X-Redmine-Switch-User: importer' -X PUT -d content[text]="sometext" -d content[comments]="somecomment" --user "$ADMIN_API_KEY_HERE:$PASSWORD_IS_IRRELEVANT" https://example.plan.io/projects/$PROJECTNAME/wiki/$DESIRED_PAGENAME.xml@
* In case you want to *purge all (!)* existing wiki pages, use the following Ruby statement.
** @pages = WikiPage.get('index').collect { |p| p['title'] }; pages.each { |p| WikiPage.delete(p) }@



h2. Prerequisites

# Redmine version must be *at least 2.2.0* in order to allow API access to wiki pages
# Install the *Pandoc binary (!)* 1.12.0.2 or newer on your system.
** See http://johnmacfarlane.net/pandoc/installing.html for details



h2. Usage

Follow these steps in the given order.


h3. In MediaWiki: Export XML file

# Deny all edits (see "MediaWiki: $wgReadOnly(Disallow editing)":https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Manual:$wgReadOnly and/or "MediaWiki: Preventing Access(Restrict editing by absolutely everyone)":https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Manual:Preventing_access#Restrict_editing_by_absolutely_everyone).
# Export the wiki as XML (see "WikiMedia: Export(How to export)":https://meta.wikimedia.org/wiki/Help:Export#How_to_export).
** *Suggestion:* @su -m www -c "php ./maintenance/dumpBackup.php --full --pagelist=./pagelist --include-files > PATH_FOR/mediawiki-pages.xml"@


h3. In XML file: Clean up and remap users

# *Search and replace any contributor names* that you want to remap to certain other Redmine users.
** *VI-Example:* @:%s/<username>\cWikiSysop<\/username>/<username>admin<\/username>/@
** *Hint:* List all contributors of the XML file via @./list_contributors.rb PATH_TO/mediawiki-pages.xml@ to verify only wanted contributors remain present.
# Optionally remove any unwanted contributions entirely.

Note that some auto-generated revisions in MediaWiki, like the "Main Page", might be missing a contributor. The script is hard-coded to handle such cases by automatically assigning them to *"admin"*.


h3. In Redmine: Prepare wiki and users

# Set *upload size* higher than the size of the biggest file that you intend to upload.
** See option __Maximum attachment size__ in in *Administration > Settings* (e.g. https://example.plan.io/settings).
# *Rename any pages* that would clash with those to be imported.
# Ensure that all contributors of the MediaWiki instance *exist as users* in Redmine.
** See *Administration > Users* (e.g. https://example.plan.io/users)
# Create a *role* with the __"Edit wiki pages"__ and __"View wiki"__ permissions.
** See *Administration > Roles and permissions > New role* (e.g. https://example.plan.io/roles/new)
# *Authorize the users* to edit the wiki of the project in question using the recently created role.
** See *Settings > Members* within the project in question.
** *Hint:* List all contributors of the XML file via @./list_contributors.rb PATH_TO/mediawiki-pages.xml@.


h3. Script: push_contents.rb

Use this script to push all MediaWiki revisions from the XML file to Redmine.

h4. Syntax-Example

pre. SCRIPT_NAME         XML_FILE                REDMINE_URL                                      ADMIN_API_KEY
./push_contents.rb 'PATH_TO/mediawiki.xml' 'https://example.plan.io/projects/$PROJECTNAME/' 'ffff0000eeee1111dddd2222cccc3333bbbb4444'

_*Important:* Ensure to provide the API key of an admin._


h3. Script: upload_files.rb

Use this script to upload all files to Redmine.

Note that the *directory name* of each image determines with which Redmine wiki page the uploaded file will be associated. Organize accordingly.

h4. Example directory hierarchy

pre. images
├── one
│   ├── bar1.jpg  # will be associated with wiki page named "one"
│   ├── bar2.jpg  # will be associated with wiki page named "one"
│   └── bar3.jpg  # will be associated with wiki page named "one"
├── two
│   ├── bar1.jpg  # will be associated with wiki page named "two"
│   ├── bar2.jpg  # will be associated with wiki page named "two"
│   └── bar3.jpg  # will be associated with wiki page named "two"
└── foo
    ├── bar1.jpg  # will be associated with wiki page named "foo"
    ├── bar2.jpg  # will be associated with wiki page named "foo"
    └── bar3.jpg  # will be associated with wiki page named "foo"


h4. Syntax-Example

pre. SCRIPT_NAME        IMAGE_DIRECTORY             REDMINE_URL               PROJECT_NAME  API_KEY
./upload_files.rb '~/export_to_planio/images' 'https://example.plan.io' 'test'        'ffff0000eeee1111dddd2222cccc3333bbbb4444'

_*Important:* Ensure to provide an API key with sufficient privileges._


h3. In Redmine: Verify imported contents

At least the *current state of each wiki page* should be manually verified to be correct.

In addition, it's advisable to check the number of history entries/revisions in **Redmine** against the one in **MediaWiki**.



h2. Resources

* Redmine API documentation
** "Wiki pages":http://www.redmine.org/projects/redmine/wiki/Rest_WikiPages
** "Using the REST API with Ruby":http://www.redmine.org/projects/redmine/wiki/Rest_api_with_ruby
*** Note that, as of 2013-09-25, the outlined example class declaration is incomplete.
* http://apidock.com/rails/ActiveResource/Base
* https://github.com/rails/activeresource#active-resource-
* https://github.com/edavis10/redmine/blob/master/config/routes.rb



h2. License

The **MediaWiki to Redmine Migration Tool** is released under the "MIT License":http://www.opensource.org/licenses/MIT.
